Welcome back, Sarah and David. It's great to have you. We've got you for up to 30 minutes.
We'll just maybe let you kick off with some introductory comments and things and we'll
hand over for some Q&A. Okay, thank you. I'm Teina Kotakatua. I'm David Woods,
the Chair of New Zealand Green Investment Finance and I'm joined by our Chief Executive,
Sarah Minhinik. We were established to accelerate investment in New Zealand's decarbonisation and
emissions reduction to help address a perceived market failure. One of our key aims was to secure
co-investment of private capital to address the scale of the climate investment challenge.
As you're aware, in April 2025, our shareholding ministers announced that the government had
decided to wind down ends it gives existing portfolio of investments and ultimately exit
those investments over time. Ministers' expectations were and continue to be that we will
meet all legal obligations and operate in a financially sustainable and self-funding manner
during the wind down period. We're well advanced in that process and are achieving good results.
We've returned total capital to the crown of over $500 million since our wind down plan was
approved by our shareholding ministers both through cancelling uncalled shares and through cash
distributions of $216 million. There is still work to do as we have some remaining investment
positions to exit. These are complex structures that take time to manage. However, the board is
confident in the team that we have and their ability to deliver the best outcome for the
taxpayer in the circumstances. We will answer all questions from the committee as fully as possible
but we request members understanding that we must protect legally and commercially sensitive information.
Thank you. Thank you very much for the work you've done. Obviously the committee is really
interested to know more about your wind down process, what that looks like, particularly
around existing investments, what's happening with those and also I think looking through the
questions from you, there were 16 staff in terms of the transitional arrangements and what's
happening with the staff just to start with. If I start with the staff, there were 16 I think
when we were here last year, there are four today. The board is concerned to keep those staff
in place because of the complexity of the exit process from the remaining investments.
Thank you. In terms of detail, I can't really talk about individual investments and how we've
exited individual investments. We've sold about two-thirds of our total investments
since the wind down plan was approved. We have a small number of both equity and debt
investments. The total commitment still outstanding is about $80 million if I take undrawn
commitments and investments. So of the investments that you have been able to sell,
how many of them have been sold into New Zealand ownership? Sarah, do you want to?
Almost everything. Okay, that's great. In terms of the hole that's going to be left in the market,
do you see that being built by other entities or do you think there will be a gap?
Sorry if that's too difficult for you to answer. I think it's a policy question that
we the government has to address. Fair enough. Someone else can go and look and beckon.
Thank you, David, and to yourself for the work you've done in winding this down and to your team.
I know it must be a testing time for them as they go through the process. Just in terms of timelines
to get that hopefully $80 million or so, what's your expectations or the minister's expectations
around when that would be liquidated and returned to government? We're in discussion with
Treasury and with the shareholding ministers. We expect the divestment stage of the process
will finish during the next financial year. So the year to June 2027. We'd like it to finish
sooner, but it's really a question of the process we have to go through. For instance,
most of our equity positions have preemptive rights and that takes a time. So we're working
through it as quickly as we can. And are you able to give us indication of I guess your investments?
You'd have like a book value on those investments versus the realised value. Is there much difference
in between those two? And if so, give us a sense of that. Let Sarah take the detail,
but the board is very satisfied that exiting as close to power as we can and the rest of them.
Yeah, the exits have been pleasing. We were concerned this time last year when we were in
the planning phases of the process that we could achieve elegant exits that would deliver value
back to the Crown, but also be done in a way that was palatable for the portfolio companies.
And I think we've helped that balance quite nicely. If we put solar zero to one side,
because that's still ongoing, our blended recovery rate has been around 83 to 84 percent
on average. Some of them have obviously been much higher. The recoveries on the debt have been
very good. And I think that that is appropriate given that the portfolio was not in breach.
And for these assets, we are a required seller. So there will be a discount naturally.
Yeah. Thank you very much. Todd Stephenson. Thanks for being here.
Have you given any thought obviously over the life of the organisation and even in
the windout? There's probably quite a lot of learnings and insights, et cetera.
Have you given any thought to how that could be passed on, whether it's to Treasury or another
central agency, so that what you've learned over the life of the organisation isn't kind of
We're archiving all our records and we're happy to, at an appropriate time, have debriefing
sessions with various people. But at the moment, I don't think that time is now.
No, but you've obviously given us a thought, which I think is good. Because I think,
yeah, one of the things, again, quite often, the insights and experiences are lost
across governments. I think just even giving that some thought is great. And we can follow up on that
as well. I was actually going to ask a similar question. And you have a huge amount of knowledge
about what is going to be a really important investment sector in New Zealand's future. So
I'm really pleased to know that those insights are being captured. And I'm aware this might
be the last time you come to the SLEE Committee. So thank you very much for your work.
Just in terms of the wind down plan, just like what are the significant tasks that you say
in that row ahead? And what do you see as some of the more significant tasks you still need to
complete? I think we're still in the mode of selling assets one by one. When we started,
could we sell the whole portfolio? That wasn't an option that was available at a
realistic price. So we have been divesting assets individually. We will probably not be able to
sell all of them. So there will be a remaining set of assets. And we're in discussions with
Treasury about what needs to happen then. Apart from the physical investments, then we have to
wind down all our premises, our lease costs, silly things like subscriptions. But the whole
thing has to be wound out and that will take a couple of months. Yeah. So I mean, obviously you
can't go into the details of specific assets. And I get that. But in terms of those discussions
with Treasury about what will happen with the remaining assets, are you able to give us some
options in a broad level that have been canvassed? I think it's really something that
we need to ask to address. We are in detailed discussions with them. Yeah. Just going back
to one of your earlier answers, Sarah, it was you, I think that said you'd kind of been sort of
84, 85% recovery on the value. It's fair to say that people know you have to sell, isn't it?
So that there is a discount. In terms of the way we could have done this, was there,
do you think there were all two different ways? Obviously, you bypassed the portfolio approach
because you saw there was going to be too much of a haircut taken by taking that approach. But
if we've done this over a longer period of time, obviously holding on to the assets in different
ways in different parts of government, do you think we could have actually preserved some of
the equity or if the equity were done it differently? To be honest, I haven't really
gone there in a great deal of thought because it was a policy decision and we were just tasked
with executing it. These are decisions for the minister, so I appreciate that. But thank you for
your work. Thanks, Megan. We're going to go to Dr Dave Lawson. Yeah, just a learning question
really, giving your reflection on it about scope and complementarity with other funds,
such as the Provincial Growth Fund and of course then it morphed into the Regional Infrastructure
Fund. Sorry, David, we're back here. Can you talk into the microphone? Yes. Thank you.
Did you hear all of that? Yes. So yeah, that's the question, the complementarity and scope
question because there's some learnings there, I'm sure, where we're crossing over each other or
there certainly are learnings. We have had detailed discussions with Treasury about different
areas and complementarity, but again, I'm afraid it's a policy question. Yeah, I understand that.
Really, it's from our perspective, it's a learning question. What did you learn from that
environment? I think on a more general level, we're very friendly with all of our
opposite numbers at all of these places. So David and I regularly talk to our counterparts at
ECAR and NZGCP and Kanawa and our RK, various other places, and there's quite a good spirit,
I would say, amongst the execs and the board members. So I suppose to the extent that's helpful,
that has been an ongoing theme of people engaging with each other. Right. It's really
following on from your question earlier, Megan, framing it slightly differently.
Maybe a question for me, possibly for you as the Chair, David, with regard to some of the entities
which you're potentially going to struggle to completely wind down, do you anticipate a
transfer of that value into another government entity via Treasury's guidance or something like that?
I think that that is clearly an option, but it's a, we will continue selling
divesting assets until we're told to stop and we'll then deal with whatever's left over.
I'm just mindful that you've got an end date on June 30th or June 26th, that's that runways
running short. Is that? No, I think.
But you speak to everything to be materially completed by the 30th of June?
I think that's what we thought a year ago, but our new SPE has it running until the end of
this year, potentially early into the calendar year next year, but we would like to have it
finished by the end of this year. So we may in fact see you again next year.
I don't know. Well, thank you very much for that. We do appear to be at the end of our
questions. So thank you for the ongoing work and the updates. Do they really appreciate it?